Shina low she's a communication adviser
at the Norwegian Refugee Council she
joins us now live from occupied East
Jerusalem thank you so much for your
time so the wfp says it's not taken its
decision lightly to pause food
deliveries to the north of the Gaza
Strip as a humanitarian organization
yourself who has worked in Gaza can you
understand why they've come to this
decision you know it's a really tough
decision for all of us in terms of of
determining where and when we're going
to be able to to operate but the
conditions right now on the ground for
humanitarians are simply unacceptable in
any other context humanitarians would be
pulling out at this point because it is
simply so dangerous and there are no
guarantees of the safety of humanitarian
staff neither uh because of Israeli
targeting of convoys Israeli targeting
of police who are there to protect Aid
convoys and then of course due to the
desperation because because of the lack
of Aid that's getting in there's just
been a deterioration of civil order in
Gaza that's led to to the the charging
and and looting of of aid aid convoys as
they're trying to make their way I'm
sure the wfp did not take this decision
lightly but it's but they need to they
also have a duty of care to their staff
and to the and to the people seeking out
Aid not to not to be putting them in in
dangerous positions right of course
spell it out for us a little bit more
the challenges that humanitarian
organizations like yourself face when
you turn up with a truck full of Aid or
several trucks full of Aid and want to
get into Gaza what what exactly is going
wrong well first of all there are all
sorts of logistical hurdles still in
terms of getting Aid into into Gaza
including uh arbitrary capricious and
extremely intensive screenings that are
that the Israelis are requiring for any
Aid that's entering Gaza on top of that
we've seen uh is Israeli protesters
blocking the delivery of Aid uh now uh
the the UN which is handling all
deliveries from Rafa into or from Rafa
Crossing into into Gaza they uh were
being accompanied by Palestinian police
officers but the repeated targeting of
police officers accompanying Aid convoys
has led to the police no longer
providing that assistance that means
that these truck drivers are and convoys
are are unprotected and that people
desperate for Aid are are charging
trucks uh in some cases even beating the
the truck drivers uh and damaging the
vehicles this is the level of
desperation just even in Rafa let alone
in Northern Gaza where people have been
deprived or only in the first month and
a half of the year out of 77 planned
convoys the UN and and other NOS were
only able to to fully or partially
facilitate 15 of those of those uh
planned missions because of lack of for
coordination or or flat out denials by
the Israelis you mentioned those
extraordinary scenes that we saw earlier
this week where a convoy of trucks were
met by hundreds of those hungry
desperate Palestinians but then the
Israeli military started firing on them
and we had SE several uh people wounded
did it have to come to that I mean that
could it have been
avoided you know I I really don't
understand why the Israeli military was
shooting at at uh people desperate
people seeking Aid I can't imagine that
that any Aid workers would want um
people who are desperate and and and on
the brink of starvation to be shot while
seeking out Aid of course one of the
things that we need in order for us to
be able to deliver Aid safely is a
ceasefire and guarantees of access to
all parts of Gaza where where AID
workers and those seeking out Aid will
will be guaranteed of their safety in
terms of the conditions of of those
attempted distributions earlier this
week it's just simply
unacceptable what is your understanding
of the food security situation in Gaza
now particularly in the north I mean how
big a blow is it that we're seeing this
suspension of food
Aid well as of now children 15.6% of
children under the age of two in
Northern Gaza are facing acute
starvation these are unprecedented
numbers prior to October 7th less than
1% of children throughout Gaza uh we're
facing that level of starvation and Mal
malnutrition so it's it's quite quite
severe in terms of Northern Gaza there's
limited food getting in there people are
running out of even animal fodder to eat
uh I was speaking to one of my
colleagues today who's in Rafa who's in
touch with Folks up north telling us
about the skyrocketing prices people
paying hundreds of dollars for a few
kilos of of flour uh because it because
the situation is so desperate in the
even in the the South where AID is is
more plentiful and and some commercial
uh commercial goods are reaching the
market the cost of of food has just
skyrocketed and and even if people have
money they still often cannot afford to
to purchase enough food for themselves
or their
families okay sh uh I really appreciate
you talking to us communication advisor
at the Norwegian Refugee Council
speaking to us there from occupied East
Jerusalem